It's April 23rd, 2012. The dog days of the lockout-shortened NBA season. It is game #64 for the Charlotte Bobcats. They are 7-56. 

It is Monday night, and you are 25 years old. The oven reads 7:42 PM when you cross over from the kitchen into the unironically, bestfriend-named “Dudes’ Dojo Den.” The house smells, mostly of pizza and cheap preferences left over from college. The weekend was spent drinking at home and then drinking at the bar you and your roommates always drink at, with a little bit of daydrinking sprinkled in. Work was painful. As you settle into the crusty corduroy loveseat that has been held on to for too long, your eyes glance up at the 40-inch screen that each of the house's other 3 inhabitants' eyes are glued to.

Jamario Moon curls off a pindown screen, catches a pass from Gerald Henderson, and drills a 22-foot, feet-on-the-line jumper from the right wing, cutting the Wizards' lead to 13 points with 9 minutes and 38 seconds remaining in the second quarter. This is NBA basketball. For the next one hour and 42 minutes, this quartet is focused on the offensive orchestration of DJ Augustin and the low-post efficiency of Nene. There is no multi-view. There is no scrolling during commercial breaks. There are no distractions. This is the lost art of watching. 

The halftime buzzer sounds, and it is a 24-point game. The Bobcats have 39 points. These next 12 minutes are for refills, microwave beeps, plates stacking in the sink, cardboard box breakdowns, trash takeout duty, disagreements about whose turn it is for trash takeout duty, paths crossing, water running, half-cleaning, and laundry thrown on the bed. Each of you reappear like worker bees summoned by the queen, guided into the den by your internal sports clocks. Charles Barkley’s new Weight Watchers ad runs as the formation settles back into place. 

The second half begins, and there are no live odds updates. There is no parlay being cooked up by your buddy; he doesn’t even have an iPhone yet. Jan Vesely opens up the scoring with a mean putback. Your DMV-native friend is trying to convince himself that the Wall-to-Vesely connection will bring a championship to the Wizards. He is proven right for the moment with a Jan-to-John alley-oop, momentarily interrupting the 34% shooting performance the Bobcats are putting on. Play becomes increasingly painful as we near the halfway point of the third quarter. It passes, and the Bobcats do not have 50 points. The enjoyment in the room, however, never wanes. There is never a lull because the sluggish, miserable game in front of you forces ingenuity and inventiveness. This is the environment that a Bill Simmons’ half-baked idea is born out of. The hypothetical, reminiscing, forward-thinking, GM-questioning, player-predicting extravaganza that is, or was, sports talk born out of a bad game. True fans of the sport, the end of the third quarter does nothing to dampen your enthusiasm. 83-62. There is no such thing as switching channels. 

Questions and conversation continue to pop around the room. At this point, it is a competition to name the most obscure player you can think of and where they went to college. Amid the shouts and props, the pauses to think and the I have a good ones, the eyes don’t waver. All four pairs are in sync to soak up the Bobcats eight points over the final 11 minutes and 18 seconds of the game. Chalk it up to an excellent showing by the 21st-ranked Wizards defense. Washington breaks 100 points on a fundamental finish from Chris Singleton, set up nicely by Sheldon Mack. The horn sounds in the Verizon Center, and the basketball fanatics or perhaps Bobcat believers, if they exist, are the last to shuffle out. 101-73. The buzz and chatter fade into oblivion as one hand clicks off the remote, another drags a plate away, a pointer finger flicks the light switch, and the only sound that remains is the pitter-patter of eight feet, each pair splitting off as they scurry back into their quarters. The ghost of a Monday night game lingers in the air, and it stays there untouched for many years. 2.5 hours lost to the crevices of NBA history. What did we learn? Patience? The defensive pick-and-roll tendencies of DeSagana Diop? This is NBA basketball, and the lost art of watching it.
